Restructuring Expressions (#697)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/subqueries/call-subquery.adoc

= CALL subqueries
:description: This page describes how to use the CALL subquery with Cypher.

The `CALL` clause can be used to invoke a subquery.
Unlike other subqueries in Cypher, it can be used to perform changes to the database (e.g. xref:clauses/create.adoc[] new nodes), and it requires an importing xref:clauses/with.adoc[] clause.

[NOTE]
====
The `CALL` clause is also used for calling procedures.
For descriptions of the `CALL` clause in this context, refer to xref::clauses/call.adoc[`CALL` procedure].
====

[[call-syntax]]
== Syntax and rules

[source, syntax]
----
CALL LCURLY query RCURLY subqueryInTransactionsParameters?

> ----

Reviewer: I really don't think this is helpful. 90+% of software engineers have no experience with language grammars and this looks extremely confusing if you don't know what you are reading. 

Clarity-wise, this is unbeatable:
```
CALL { <query> } 
```

Also, I have no idea what `subqueryInTransactionsParameters` stands for.

There are restrictions on how `CALL` subqueries interact with enclosing queries:

* A subquery can only refer to variables from the enclosing query if they are explicitly imported.
* A subquery cannot return variables with the same names as variables in the enclosing query.

> * All variables that are returned from a subquery are afterwards available in the enclosing query.

Reviewer: I've struggled to understand any of these points, and I've forgotten them immediately as soon as the next section starts. It's too early to bring up rules before I've even seen an example, and I can't imagine in my head all that it's being described here. I'd say move it to the bottom.

[[call-returning-unit]]
== Returning subqueries and unit subqueries

Subqueries which end with a `RETURN` statement are called _returning subqueries_ while subqueries without such a return statement are called _unit subqueries_.

A subquery is evaluated for each incoming input row.
Every output row of a _returning subquery_ is combined with the input row to build the result of the subquery. 
That means that a returning subquery will influence the number of rows.
If the subquery does not return any rows, there will be no rows available after the subquery.

_Unit subqueries_, on the other hand, are used for their ability to alter the graph with clauses such as `CREATE`, `MERGE`, `SET`, and `DELETE`.

> They do not explicitly return anything, and this means that the number of rows present after the subquery is the same as was going into the subquery.

Reviewer: Same as for _rules_ above: this is too abstract, too early. These, together with the rules above, make for good summaries, but we cannot put summaries at the top and explanations afterwards, because people read top to bottom and will be extremely confused in reading digests devoid of examples that they can't understand. All this content should be exemplified (and I think it is, which is great, like the first sentence "A CALL subquery is executed once for each incoming row." which shows up exactly the same in the first example), or brought up as admonitions in the relevant sections.

----

To further make my point, I'll try an analogy. 

The current form is like the following. 

You see an ad about a free swimming course. You've always wanted to swim decently, and it's free, so you decide to join.

When you go to the course the first time, the teacher meets you all _in front_ of the swimming facility. Not _inside_, but in front. He tells you that today you are going to learn to swim free-style and breaststroke. You'r every excited to get started! He then starts talking about swimming technique -- not about points that motivate you to swim, mind you, but _technique_. You don't know how to swim, you can't see a swimmer, you can't even see the _water_, but here he is, rambling about how important it is that when you swim free-style your arms enter the water at 90 degrees angle, that the rotation of the hips is coordinated with the turn of the shoulders, but that mind you the impulse comes from the hips and only later travels to the shoulders, while the hand must have fully spread out fingers while in the air but contract them as soon as it reaches the surface, while of course you keep your feet pointed all the time, engage your abductors during each stroke, and god knows what more. 

You don't know how much this rambling is going to go on, but he's effectively barring you from entrance and delivering you this low quality podcast of extremely fine swimming details which, while _true_, are absolutely unhelpful to you, who, in the best case, are unaware of where your abductors are even _located_ (while one neighbor would swear she heard conductors and is trying to fathom how electricity fits in that speech, and another is frightened to get into the water up to her _waist_, and talks of hip rotation with head underwater just don't even register). When you think he's finally done, he does the same, but for breaststroke. A few people leave throughout the monologue and never even _enter_ the pool.

Then two things can happen:
1. you are let into the facility, and the teacher says "all right! time to put into practice what we've learnt just a while ago!". She goes and sits on a bench expecting you all to be proficient swimmers because hey, you got all the details you needed, no? And while a few struggle to get into the water, a few others make it in, start to swim _somehow_, obviously not following 80% of what the teacher mumbled about, and wonder "what was it with the hips? I feel like they're sinking all the time. He said I needed to rotate them? When? Or was that the shoulders? Or am I mixing breast and free style?" The teacher watches in disbelief what looks like a bunch of uncoordinated dogs with seizures that sloppily crawl around with nothing resembling the 90 degrees he mentioned and the hip rotation ... and it's not even clear if they're swimming free-style or breaststroke! Didn't they pay attention? :angry: God, these students get more stupid _by the week_. She looks at the pool in dismal, watching the only student who is at least decent as proof that his explanations were _fine_ ("the only one who listened!", **or** the only one who could swim _already_).
2. you are let into the facility, you all and the teacher get into the water, and she starts his monologue all over again, except this time each remark is followed by him _showing_ it in practice, and you having the time to _replicate_ it. He doesn't talk about hips until it's time. This is going well, you feel like you're getting the hang of it a bit. You don't pay too much attention to the fact that the initial monologue was pointless and utterly unhelpful. You don't remember much to be honest, other than being bored and not understanding, but the teacher is providing all the information you now need _when you need it_, so it's working, and whatever. Some time later you meet again a person that left before entering the pool, and they ask you how it went afterwards. "It was the best class I had, I learnt so much!" When you split again, he'll tell his girlfriend: "that guy is nuts - he got a _verbal_ swimming class and thinks it was the best of his life".

----

Now, of course some intro is allowed in all circumstances. You need to be _told_ not to inhale underwater, and to always exhale there, and that's info you should get _in advance_. But there's this much :peanuts: buffer in our brain for this stuff, and we have to mega-carefully evaluate what we bring up when. If it is _vital_ that we define returning and unit subqueries before we enter the swimming pool so be it (but I don't think so). But sentences like 

> Every output row of a _returning subquery_ is combined with the input row to build the result of the subquery.

are to me, as a subquery beginner, just words in the air. 

Show me my abductors first, _then_ tell me to engage them.

[[call-example-graph]]
== Example graph

The following graph is used for the examples below:

image::call_subquery_graph.svg[]

To recreate the graph, run the following query in an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE
  (a:Person:Child {name: 'Alice', age: 20}),
  (b:Person {name: 'Bob', age: 27}),
  (c:Person:Parent {name: 'Charlie', age: 65}),
  (d:Person {name: 'Dora', age: 30})
  CREATE (a)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(b)
  CREATE (a)-[:CHILD_OF]->(c)
CREATE (:Counter {count: 0})
----

[[call-semantics]]
== Semantics

A `CALL` subquery is executed once for each incoming row.

> .Execute for each incoming row

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Given that this info is repeated above and below, I don't think we need the title.

======

The `CALL` subquery executes three times, one for each row that the `UNWIND` clause outputs.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [0, 1, 2] AS x
CALL {
  RETURN 'hello' AS innerReturn
}
RETURN innerReturn
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| innerReturn 
| 'hello' 
| 'hello'
| 'hello'
d|Rows:3
|===
======

Each execution of a `CALL` subquery can observe changes from previous executions.

> .Observe changes from previous execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

2+d|Rows:3
|===

======

[[call-importing-variables]]
== Importing variables into subqueries

Variables are imported into a subquery using an importing `WITH` clause.

[NOTE]
====
References to a variable in the outer scope that were not imported will introduce a new variable.
====

As the subquery is evaluated for each incoming input row, the imported variables get bound to the corresponding values from the input row in each evaluation.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [0, 1, 2] AS x
CALL {
  WITH x
  RETURN x * 10 AS y
}
RETURN x, y
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| x | y
| 0 | 0
| 1 | 10
| 2 | 20
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

An importing `WITH` clause must:

* Consist only of simple references to outside variables - e.g. `WITH x, y, z`. Aliasing or expressions are not supported in importing `WITH` clauses - e.g. `WITH a AS b` or `WITH a+1 AS b`.
* Be the first clause of a subquery (or the second clause, if directly following a `USE` clause).

[CAUTION]
====
The order in which subqueries are executed is not defined.
If a query result depends on the order of execution of subqueries, an `ORDER BY` clause should precede the `CALL` clause.

> ====

Reviewer: Let's make this admonition into its own section, as it has nothing todo with variables. There's also further details and an example which are graphically not linked to the admonition.

:description: The `+CALL {}+` clause evaluates a subquery that returns some values.

[[call]]
= CALL {} 

> The `CALL` clause is used to call a subquery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CALL` clause can be used to invoke a subquery.
```

Unlike other subqueries in Cypher, it can be used to perform changes to the database (e.g. xref:clauses/create.adoc[] new nodes), and it requires an importing xref:clauses/with.adoc[] clause.

[NOTE]
====
The `CALL` clause is also used for calling procedures.
For descriptions of the `CALL` clause in this context, refer to xref::clauses/call.adoc[`CALL` procedure].
====

[[call-syntax]]
== Syntax 

[source, syntax]
----
CALL LCURLY regularQuery RCURLY subqueryInTransactionsParameters?
----

[[call-returning-unit]]
== Returning subqueries and unit subqueries

> Subqueries which end in a `RETURN` statement are called _returning subqueries_ while subqueries without such a return statement are called _unit subqueries_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Subqueries which end with a `RETURN` statement are called _returning subqueries_ while subqueries without such a return statement are called _unit subqueries_.
```

A subquery is evaluated for each incoming input row.

> Every output row of a _returning subquery_ is combined with the input row to build the result of the subquery.

Reviewer 2: I am a little worried about the word combined here, it feels misleading but not sure right now how to reword it

That means that a returning subquery will influence the number of rows.
If the subquery does not return any rows, there will be no rows available after the subquery.

> _Unit subqueries_, on the other hand, are called for their ability to alter the graph with clauses such as `CREATE`, `MERGE`, `SET`, and `DELETE`.

Reviewer 2: That isn't why they are called unit, I assume it is because they don't return anything, so are the unit case, return subqueries can also alter the graph afaik, it it more that they don't alter the number of rows in the driving table

They not explicitly return anything, and this means that the number of rows present after the subquery is the same as was going into the subquery.

[[call-example-graph]]
== Example graph

The following graph is used for the examples below:

image::call_subquery_graph.svg[]

To recreate the graph, run the following query in an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE
  (a:Person:Child {name: 'Alice', age: 20}),
  (b:Person {name: 'Bob', age: 27}),
  (c:Person:Parent {name: 'Charlie', age: 65}),
  (d:Person {name: 'Dora', age: 30})
  CREATE (a)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(b)
  CREATE (a)-[:CHILD_OF]->(c)
CREATE (:Counter {count: 0})
----

[[call-semantics]]
== Semantics

> A `CALL` clause is executed once for each incoming row.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `CALL` subquery is executed once for each incoming row.
```

.Execute for each incoming row
======

> The `CALL` clause executes three times, one for each row that the `UNWIND` clause outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CALL` subquery executes three times, one for each row that the `UNWIND` clause outputs.
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [0, 1, 2] AS x
CALL {
  RETURN 'hello' AS innerReturn
}
RETURN innerReturn
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="m"]
|===
| innerReturn 
| 'hello' 
| 'hello'
| 'hello'
d|Rows:3
|===
======

> Each execution of a `CALL` clause can observe changes from previous executions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each execution of a `CALL` subquery can observe changes from previous executions.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is exactly what is happening, the observation of set updates is not to do with CALL subqueries

.Observe changes from previous execution
======

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [0, 1, 2] AS x
CALL {
  MATCH (n:Counter)
    SET n.count = n.count + 1
  RETURN n.count AS innerCount
}
WITH innerCount
MATCH (n:Counter)
RETURN
  innerCount,
  n.count AS totalCount
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols=""2*<m"]
|===

| innerReturn | totalCount

| 1 |  3

| 2 | 3

| 3 | 3

2+d|Rows:3
|===

======

[[call-importing-variables]]
== Importing variables into subqueries

> Variables are imported into a subquery using an importing `WITH` clause.

Reviewer 2: Might be good to point out that any reference to a variable in the outer scope that wasn't imported will instead a newly introduced variable

As the subquery is evaluated for each incoming input row, the imported variables get bound to the corresponding values from the input row in each evaluation.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [0, 1, 2] AS x
CALL {
  WITH x
  RETURN x * 10 AS y
}
RETURN x, y
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| x | y
| 0 | 0
| 1 | 10
| 2 | 20
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

An importing `WITH` clause must:

* Consist only of simple references to outside variables - e.g. `WITH x, y, z`. Aliasing or expressions are not supported in importing `WITH` clauses - e.g. `WITH a AS b` or `WITH a+1 AS b`.
* Be the first clause of a subquery (or the second clause, if directly following a `USE` clause).

[CAUTION]
====
The order in which subqueries are executed is not defined.
If a query result depends on the order of execution of subqueries, an `ORDER BY` clause should precede the `CALL` clause.
====

.The order in which subqueries are executed
======

This query creates a linked list of all `:Person` nodes in order of ascending age.

> The `CALL` clause is relying on the incoming row ordering to ensure that a correctly linked list is created, thus the incoming rows must be ordered with a preceding `ORDER BY` clause.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CALL` clause is relying on the incoming row ordering to ensure that a correctly ordered linked list is created, thus the incoming rows must be ordered with a preceding `ORDER BY` clause.
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (person:Person)
> WITH person ORDER BY person.age ASC LIMIT 1
>   SET person:ListHead
> WITH *
> MATCH (next: Person)
>   WHERE NOT next:ListHead
> WITH next ORDER BY next.age
> CALL {
>   WITH next
>   MATCH (current:ListHead)
>     REMOVE current:ListHead
>     SET next:ListHead
>     CREATE(current)-[r:IS_YOUNGER_THAN]->(next)
>   RETURN current AS from, next AS to
> }
> RETURN
>   from.name AS name,
>   from.age AS age,
>   to.name AS closestOlderName,
>   to.age AS closestOlderAge

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MATCH (person:Person)
WITH person ORDER BY person.age ASC LIMIT 1
  SET person:ListHead
WITH *
MATCH (nextPerson: Person&!ListHead)
WITH nextPerson ORDER BY nextPerson.age
CALL {
  WITH nextPerson
  MATCH (current:ListHead)
    REMOVE current:ListHead
    SET nextPerson:ListHead
    CREATE(current)-[:IS_YOUNGER_THAN]->(nextPerson)
  RETURN current AS from, nextPerson AS to
}
RETURN
  from.name AS name,
  from.age AS age,
  to.name AS closestOlderName,
  to.age AS closestOlderAge
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="4*<m"]
|===
| +name+ | +age+ | +closestOlderName+ | +closestOlderAge+

| "Alice" | 20 | "Bob" | 27
| "Bob" | 27 | "Dora" | 30
| "Dora" | 30 | "Charlie" | 65

4+d|Rows: 3
|===

======

[[call-post-union]]
== Post-union processing

> Subqueries can be used to process the results of a `UNION` query further.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Call subqueries can be used to process the results of a `UNION` query further.
```

This example query finds the youngest and the oldest person in the database and orders them by name.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CALL {
  MATCH (p:Person)
  RETURN p
  ORDER BY p.age ASC
  LIMIT 1
UNION
  MATCH (p:Person)
  RETURN p
  ORDER BY p.age DESC
  LIMIT 1
}
RETURN p.name, p.age
ORDER BY p.name
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| p.name | p.age
| "Alice" | 20
| "Charlie" | 65
2+d|Rows: 2
|===

> If different parts of a result should be matched differently, with some aggregation over the whole results, subqueries need to be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If different parts of a result should be matched differently, with some aggregation over the whole result, subqueries need to be used.
```

This example query finds friends and/or parents for each person.
Subsequently the number of friends and parents are counted together.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> MATCH (p:Person)

Reviewer 2: A perfect example for COUNT {} to be used 😅

CALL {
  WITH p
  OPTIONAL MATCH (p)-[:FRIEND_OF]->(other:Person)
  RETURN other
UNION
  WITH p
  OPTIONAL MATCH (p)-[:CHILD_OF]->(other:Parent)
  RETURN other
}
RETURN DISTINCT p.name, count(other)
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| p.name | count(other)
| "Alice" | 2
| "Bob" | 0
| "Charlie" | 0
| "Dora" | 0
2+d|Rows: 4
|===

[[call-aggregation]]
== Aggregations

> Returning subqueries change the number of results of the query: The result of the `CALL` clause is the combined result of evaluating the subquery for each input row.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returning subqueries change the number of results of the query: The result of the `CALL` subquery is the combined result of evaluating the subquery for each input row.
```

The following example finds the name of each person and the names of their friends:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
CALL {
  WITH p
  MATCH (p)-[:FRIEND_OF]-(c:Person)
  RETURN c.name AS friend
}
RETURN p.name, friend
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| p.name | friend
| "Alice" | "Bob"
| "Bob" | "Alice"
2+d|Rows: 2
|===

> The number of results of the subquery changed the number of results of the enclosing query: Instead of 4 rows, one for each node), there are now 2 rows which were found for Alice and Bob respectively. No rows are returned for Charlie and Dora since they have no friends in our example graph.

Reviewer 2: Whilst the sentiment is true, I worry about the fact this query makes a simple query harder. This is just this query:

MATCH (p)-[:FRIEND_OF]-(c:Person)
RETURN p.name, c.name

> We can also use subqueries to perform isolated aggregations. In this example we count the number of relationships each person has.

Reviewer 2: This is where the new COUNT and COLLECT really shine tbh, feels almost wrong to recommend this method

> As we get one row from each evaluation of the subquery, the number of rows is the same, before and after the `CALL` clause:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we get one row from each evaluation of the subquery, the number of rows is the same, before and after the `CALL` subquery:
```

Anyway where you say `CALL` clause should really be `CALL` subquery

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
CALL {
  WITH p
  MATCH (p)--(c)
  RETURN count(c) AS numberOfConnections
}
RETURN p.name, numberOfConnections
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| p.name | numberOfConnections
| "Alice" | 3
| "Bob" | 2
| "Charlie" | 2
| "Dora" | 3
2+d|Rows: 4
|===

[[call-aggregation-imported-variables]]
== Aggregation on imported variables

> Aggregations in subqueries are scoped to the subquery evaluation, also for imported variables.

Reviewer 2: The aggregation in this example is on other and not on p though I believe

The following example counts the number of younger persons for each person in the graph:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)
CALL {
  WITH p
  MATCH (other:Person)
  WHERE other.age < p.age
  RETURN count(other) AS youngerPersonsCount
}
RETURN p.name, youngerPersonsCount
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +p.name+ | +youngerPersonsCount+
| "Alice" | 0
| "Bob" | 1
| "Charlie" | 3
| "Dora" | 2
2+d|Rows: 4
|===

[[call-unit-subqueries]]
== Unit subqueries and side-effects

> Unit subqueries are called for their ability to alter the graph with updating clauses.

Reviewer 2: See above comment about how this isn't the reasoning behind the naming
